---
title: Hackathons can help you recharge
layout: post
category: writing
date: 2016-10-20
image-sm: thumb-2016-10-20-impulse-healthhack-2016.jpg
image: 2016-10-20-impulse-healthhack-2016.jpg
alt: Impulse (HealthHack 2016)
project-date: Oct 2016
description: A sleep-in can be good for your health, but so can tackling a different problem
---
Hackathons, where you design, prototype or code tech solutions to problems from a Friday night to Sunday night, generally wipe me out. Weekends are usually my recharge time.

But, creatively and intellectually, it's great to be thrown a problem and told that you're going to ship a solution in 48 hours whether you like it or not. In a PhD it's easy to have days or even weeks when you just don't want to deal with your work; spending a weekend making appreciable progress on something useful that you're not tied to for the next half-decade is a nice reset and a reminder of what you can do. 

[Healthhack](healthhack.com.au) particularly hit my sweet spot: I got to develop skills that I'm interested in folding into my career stack, and I got to apply them to problems that have obvious social value. Our team prototyped Impulse, an app that lets you talk to your future self:

<iframe src="https://www.facebook.com/plugins/video.php?href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2Fhealthhackcbr%2Fvideos%2F1802347846650512%2F&show_text=0&width=400" width="400" height="400" style="border:none;overflow:hidden;margin:10px auto" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" allowTransparency="true" allowFullScreen="true"></iframe>

Impulse went down really well with the judges: we won the **Commercial Potential Award**, which includes some AWS and Azure credit, some Github subs, and two months of access to the [Entry29](http://entry29.org.au/) coworking space to develop the idea further.

But, more importantly, Healthhack was a great opportunity to make some friends in Canberra's awesome public health community and to feel inspired about my other side-projects. I treasure lazy weekends, but the feeling of industriousness that I got out of Healthhack stayed with me well after I caught up on sleep.

Now, back to that paper.